# Introduction

Memory is hardware that your computer uses to load the operating system and run programs.  It consists of one or more [RAM](https://techterms.com/definition/ram) chips that each have several memory modules.  The amount of real memory in a computer is limited to the amount of RAM installed.  Common memory sizes are 256MB, 512MB, and 1GB.

Because your computer has a finite amount of RAM, it is possible to  run out of memory when too many programs are running at one time.  This  is where virtual memory comes in.  Virtual memory increases the  available memory your computer has by enlarging the "address space," or  places in memory where data can be stored.  It does this by using hard  disk space for additional memory allocation.  However, since the hard  drive is much slower than the RAM, data stored in virtual memory must be mapped back to real memory in order to be used.

But, alas, we're not able to always enjoy the scalability of virtual memory due to the villainous memory leaks!

A memory leak is like a virtual oil leak in your computer.  It slowly drains the available [memory](https://techterms.com/definition/memory), reducing the amount of free memory the system can use.  Most memory leaks are caused by a [program](https://techterms.com/definition/program) that unintentionally uses up increasing amounts of memory while it is  running.  This is typically a gradual process that gets worse as the  program remains open.  If the leak is bad enough, it can cause the  program to crash or even make the whole computer freeze.

The most common reason programs have memory leaks is due to a  programming error where unused memory is not allocated back to the  system.  This means the amount of [RAM](https://techterms.com/definition/ram) the program uses is always growing.  Therefore, the program is  constantly "leaking" memory.  A memory leak may also be caused by a  program that requests new memory too frequently, instead of using  available memory.  This means each time more memory is requested, the  program takes up additional RAM instead of using memory that has already been made available to the program.

Fortunately, memory leaks are not as messy as oil leaks and can be  more easily fixed.  Software development applications often include [debuggers](https://techterms.com/definition/debugger) that can check programs for memory leaks.  Once the source of the leak  is found, the programmer can modify the code so that the program uses  memory more efficiently.  **If you are using a program that has a  memory leak, you can temporarily fix the problem by simply quitting the  program and opening it again.**  Once the program has been quit, the  memory is automatically allocated back to the system.  Of course, if the leak continues to be a problem, the best solution is to let the  developer know about the issue so it can be fixed.
